World map controls

This guide is also available as a PDF document, in the same folder as the game executable.

You can always open the guide by pressing the ? button in the top left

Press and hold the left-mouse button to drag the map around, use the mouse-wheel to zoom in and out. Press the HOME button on your keyboard to focus the camera on your current formation's flagship

Your ships, and enemy ships, are displayed as actual images of ships when you zoom in on them, and with a NATO Icon, the NATO icon for your ship is a blue circle, the enemies are a red square rotated 45 degrees, Unknown ships are yellow flower symbols, and civilian ships are green squares.

Inside the friendly ship symbol, there is: a green line indicating the direction the ship is moving in and a red arrow indicating the direction the ship is commanded to go

Feel free to close this guide, Have a look around, when you are ready come back and go to the next page about ship controls
NEWPAGE
Formations

Every ship, plane, helicopter, drone, submarine, or missile is part of a "formation". And you control things by giving orders to formation, not individual ships.
Every formation has a flagship. If the flagship is destroyed, another vessel in the formation takes that role.

You can see your formations at the bottom of the screen, displayed as ship-cards. The cards which are grouped together and have a same coloured background are in a formation, the first card to the left is the flagship.
You can drag cards with your left-mouse button to other existing formations to re-assign ships, or move them to the new formation marker on the right to create a new formation.

By right-clicking a card in a formation, you select that formation. All movement and attack orders now go to ships in that formation. The selected formation has a slightly taller background than the rest.

TODO, consider if helicopters and ships should be together
Note that formations are strictly only for the same type, you can't put a drone in a formation with ships.

TODO write about flying formations

TODO write about submarine formations

TODO write about formation mission when added

NEWPAGE
Formation control for ship, when under manual control

Every formation automatically sails towards the waypoints (green crosses), RIGHT CLICK to clear all waypoints and place a new one, SHIFT+RIGHT CLICK to add multiple waypoints.
The slowest ship dictates the speed. When the final waypoint is reached, the formation stops.

In the bar at the top of the screen, you can see your speed indicator drop-down menu, if you click the drop-down bottom you can select your commanded speed between "stop","slow", "cruise" and "full" (By the way "flank"-speed is a purely American term, and you are playing as a European ship).
You can also press the "q" amd "w" to decrease/increase commanded speed.
Your flag-ships current speed, in knots, is written on next to your commanded speed. Remember that ships are very heavy and take quite a while to turn or change speed.

You can use "time-warp" to speed up (or pause, or unpause) the simulation; there are 6 different time-warp settings (x0 (pause), x1 (real-time) ,x5 , x10, x50, and x100 ), press the number keys 1,2,3,4,5,6 on your keyboard to switch between them, press comma "," to reduce time-warp, period "." to increase it, space or 1 to pause, enter or 6 to go to the fastest warp. You can see the current time-warp in the bottom-left of your screen
The game will automatically reduce time-warp if your computer can't run that fast. (That may happen if a lot of missiles are in the air)
Let me say right away, if your computer can't run at least 50x timewarp, you should SKIP THIS GAME!

Feel free to close this guide and try sailing around a bit, when you are ready come back and go to the next page about Radar, detection, and how to board ships
Oh, and try not to sail aground, that will destroy your ship.
NEWPAGE
Spotting the enemy
Before you can fight the enemy, you need to SPOT them and IDENTIFY them
Ships which are spotted but not identified are marked with a yellow flower.
Identified enemy ships are marked with a red square rotated 45 degrees, Identified civilian ships are marked with a green square
flying targets get marked with the top-half of the ship-marker
When a target has been spotted but not identified, our land-based intelligence will work on identifying the ships, it may take up to half an hour in-game time (use time-warp), but eventually the ship will be identified.

In this game, you have 6 tools for spotting targets : transponder, Vision, Radar, ESM, active sonar, passive sonar.
1. Some civilian ships have their transponder turned on, they are always spotted and identified. In game, the transponder never lies.
2. Vision: The small YELLOW dashed circle around your ships is your visual range (assuming that other ships are 20 m tall), ALL ships inside this gets instantly SPOTTED and IDENTIFIED. Visual spotting range depends on weather and time of day.
3. Radar: Press R to toggle radar for one of the ships in your formation ON or OFF (it starts OFF), when on:
    A green dashed circle indicates your radar horizon (again assuming 20 m tall targets) (Taller ships, or high-flying drones or aircraft can see and be seen further, approximately ∝√height);
    A green dashed circle (with bigger dashes) indicates your radar power-range: how far away you radar could spot an anti-ship missile sized target if there was no horizon (this range is ∝(cross-section)^(1/4));
    To be seen on radar, a target needs to be inside both power-range and horizon.
    Targets in radar range get SPOTTED but NOT IDENTIFIED (Except missiles, a sea-skimming track moving at mach 1 is never neutral and therefore instantly gets classified).
4. ESM (Electronic Support Measured): your ships automatically IDENTIFY when the enemy turns on their radar (military radar is very distinct) and is within the horizon and in 1.75x power range of the radar.  BEWARE, the enemy has ESM too.
We will cover Sonar later.

Place your mouse over a target to see how we have spotted it, and what information we have.
NEWPAGE
What air-defence doing: defending your ship

TODO describe exact method
When your ships come under attack, or you attack the enemy, they will automatically defend themselves using every weapon at their disposal.

In this game, ships have a number of hit-points (Hp). As damage accumulates the ships start smoking heavily. when their Hp reaches 0 the crew abandons ship and the ship starts sinking.
A full list of ships and their Hp, and the damage from all weapons is available on the next page.
NEWPAGE
Hp list
TODO remember to update
* Corvettes have 40 Hp
* Frigates have 65 Hp
* Destroyers have 80 Hp
* Oil tankers have 60 Hp (but please don't sink them, that would be an ecological disaster)
* Cruise ships have 35 Hp
* Fishing Trawlers have 10 Hp

* Guns do 1 Hp damage
* SAMs (surface-to-air missiles) used in the anti-surface role do 10 Hp
* AShMs (anti-ship missiles) do 15 Hp
* HAShMs (heavy anti-ship missiles) do 25 Hp

NEWPAGE
Launching aircraft and drones
NEWPAGE
Attacking with Guns and Missiles

Let's start with your guns, the black circle is your gun range, you can shoot at targets in range by mousing over them and holding down the G key (Be aware, individual shells are not rendered in-game, and it takes a little while for your guns to rotate to the target, and a little while for the shells to fly through the air)
Your guns fire in short bursts, then take a few seconds to recalibrate their fire-control solution.
Your number of shells for your guns in your selected formation is shown at the top of the screen.

Your guns also have an anti-air range, that is the gray circle, guns automatically shoot at hostile air targets in range
A single gun-hit does 1 Hp damage to ships

In real life, there are many different types of missiles, all with their own capabilities and statistics.
TODO flesh out when we add missiles
This game only includes 3 different types of missiles, you can see how many you carry of each at the top of your screen:
1. SAMs: Surface to Air Missiles, ... You can see your SAM range as the CYAN circle; SAMS can also be launched at ships ..., but if you do, you have fewer SAMs to protect yourself with.
2. AShMs: Anti-Ship missiles, ... Your AShM range is the red circle, in game these are based on the stats of the Harpoon missile and have ...
3. HAShMs: Heavy Anti-Ship missiles, Soviet and Russian ships tend to carry heavier AShMs which do more damage and have much longer range. If you carry HAShMs their range is a larger red circle.
